---
title: "On Library Closures"
date: 2019-01-09T09:31:33+00:00
tags: [parenting]
---

### Update (July 2019)

Essex County Council committed in July 2019 to not closing any
libraries in Essex until at least 2024, see [this news
story](https://www.essexlive.news/news/essex-news/essex-county-council-issue-new-3071889).

---

*Our local library, a short walk from our house, is closing. The local
council is soliciting feedback, and at the end of a long series of
questions there was a comments box. I thought I'd take the
opportunity to write something. I imagine my words went into the
void, so I'm sharing them here.*

---

My children love our local library. The library staff know them all
by name, and I think we have the distinction of being the only
family to have hired the library for our children's birthday
parties.

My wife and I know how important books are, and since we're able
to, our children's home lives are filled with books, and time spent
reading together. Not every family can do this, but we can, so we
do.

But books in the home are no replacement for a library.

Neither is an online service a replacement for a library, though
being able to choose books online is a good thing.

Neither is a mobile library a replacement for a library, though
anything which gets books in the hands of children is a good thing.

A library is a place where children can lose themselves for an hour
at a time. Picking up books - flicking through one and putting it
back, picking up another and immersing themselves in it. Stumbling
across a collection of books in a different genre, or for a
different age group to the ones you're used to, and finding
something new.

I have three children. My oldest child is five years old, and she
loves to read. She has terrible taste in books, but she has a taste
all of her own. We read together about fairies, princesses and
ponies. I come home from work and she doesn't hear the first few
things I say to her because she's on the sofa, completely immersed
in a new library book. My younger two children will get there soon,
and I'm a little bit heartbroken for my one year old that she'll
not have the experience of wandering to the library after school to
browse, and losing herself in a book.

I'm not expecting this to change anyone's mind, but I feel like I
owe it to my children to express my sadness. I know council
finances are tight, and getting tighter. I know there are likely
more urgent needs.

We'll buy our children more books, and travel into the city centre
to visit the library there, but we won't make it as often, and
we'll only be able to do it on Saturdays, since there's not time to
get there after school.

Not everyone has that option, diminished as it is, and all our
children will be poorer for it.
